# ai-ml-project
# Hypertension Risk Prediction System
A Machine Learning project developed to predict the risk of hypertension based on user health and lifestyle parameters. 
Developed as part of Fundamentals in AI-ML course.
This project is a practical application of Machine Learning concepts, tools, and techniques.

## ⚠️ Important Disclaimer-
This hypertension risk prediction system is developed purely as an academic project to demonstrate the application of machine learning techniques. The data used for training and testing is synthetic (sourced from Kaggle) and does not represent real medical records. The outputs generated by this system are for educational purposes only and should not be interpreted as medical advice, diagnosis, or a substitute for professional healthcare.

## Project Overview

- Problem: Early prediction of hypertension risk using easily available health and lifestyle data.
- Task: Binary Classification (High Risk / Low Risk)
- Best Model: XGBoost Classifier
- Interface: Fully Command-Line Executable

  ## Features

- Compares 4 classification models (Logistic Regression, Random Forest, KNN, XGBoost)
- Handles mixed data types (numerical + categorical)
- Proper preprocessing with Label Encoding and Standard Scaling
- Saves model, scaler, encoders, and column order for consistent predictions
- Clean and user-friendly Command Line Interface (predict.py)

## Project Structure

```bash
├── data/
│   └── hypertension_dataset.csv
├── model/                  # Saved model artifacts
│   ├── columns.pkl
│   ├── encoders.pkl
│   ├── hypertension_model.pkl
│   └── scaler.pkl
├── src/
│   ├── train.py           # Training script
│   └── predict.py         # Prediction CLI
├── README.md
└── requirements.txt
```

## Technologies Used
- Python 3
- pandas, numpy
- scikit-learn
- XGBoost
- Matplotlib & Seaborn
- Joblib 

## How to Run the Project
### 1. Clone / Download the project

### 2. Install dependencies
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
### 3. Train the model
```
python src/train.py
```

### 4. Make predictions
```
python src/predict.py
```

This project successfully demonstrates the application of supervised machine learning to solve a real-world problem by building a complete pipeline from data preprocessing to inference.

# Submitted By: ADITI SAHU
REG NO.: 25BCE10844
